PTD user guide (#117)
EmertonData/glide: docs/user_guide/estimators.md

In PTD, each sample has two associated values:

| Value | Present for | Description |
|---|---|---|
| $\tilde{Y}_i$ | All $n+N$ samples | Proxy label |
| $Y_j$ | Labeled samples only ($n \ll N$) | Ground-truth label |

Denote $(\tilde{Y}^\circ_i)_{i=1}^N$ the unlabeled proxies and $(\tilde{Y}^\bullet_i)_{i=1}^n$ the labeled ones.

### Mean estimation

The PTD mean estimate is the average of $B$ bootstrap estimates:

$$\hat{\theta}_{\text{PTD}} = \frac{1}{B}\sum_{b=1}^{B}\hat{\theta}^{(b)}_{\text{PTD}}$$

where each $\hat{\theta}^{(b)}_{\text{PTD}}$ is computed during the bootstrap procedure described below.

### Bootstrap procedure

For $b = 1, \dots, B$, sample a set of indices $\mathcal{I}^{(b)}$ of size $n$ uniformly with replacement from $\{1, \dots, n\}$ and compute the bootstrap means of the labeled ground-truth and proxy labels:

$$\hat{\mu}^{(b)}_{\text{true}} = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i\in \mathcal{I}^{(b)}} Y_i, \qquad \hat{\mu}^{(b)}_{\text{proxy}} = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i\in \mathcal{I}^{(b)}} \tilde{Y}^\bullet_i$$

Each bootstrap estimate is then:

> $$\hat{\theta}^{(b)}_{\text{PTD}} = \lambda \cdot \tilde{\gamma}^{(b)} + \left(\hat{\mu}^{(b)}_{\text{true}} - \lambda \cdot \hat{\mu}^{(b)}_{\text{proxy}}\right)$$

Reviewer: Il faut également parler de lambda ici avec une phrase du style "where lambda is a power-tuning factor similar to that PPI++ described above"

Author: Traité

> where $\tilde{\gamma}^{(b)}$ is a perturbed draw of the unlabeled proxy mean.

Reviewer: Bizarre de l'introduire ici, sans avoir discuté gamma avant. Je réorganiserais un petit pour dire qu'il y a deux traitements différents : un sur le sous-ensemble labellisé -> on fait des bootstraps, un sur le sous-ensemble non-labellisé -> on applique le CLT, et enfin on combine les deux dans la formule theta.

Author: J'ai réordonné la section pour introduire le gamma auparavant

> **CLT-based speedup.** Naively, each bootstrap iteration would require resampling all $N$ proxy labels on unlabeled samples, making the total cost $O(B \cdot (n+N))$. Since $N \gg n$, this is dominated by the unlabeled set. Algorithm 3 in [[7](#ref-7)] avoids this cost: by the CLT, the mean of $N$ i.i.d. proxy scores is approximately Gaussian with mean $\hat{\gamma}^\circ = \frac{1}{N}\sum_{i=1}^{N}\tilde{Y}^\circ_i$ and variance $\hat{S}_{\gamma^\circ} = \widehat{\text{Var}}(\tilde{Y}^\circ) / N$. Each bootstrap iteration therefore replaces a full resample of the unlabeled set with a single Gaussian draw:

Reviewer: La dernière phrase est un peu difficile à comprendre je trouve. Je dirais plutôt un truc du genre "Instead of simulating B expensive bootstraps of size N, we leverage the CLT theorem by simulating B simple draws of a z-statistic, effectively mimicking the randomness of bootstraps at a far fewer computational cost". A repasser à la moulinette de Claude qui parle mieux anglais que moi :-)

Author: Traité, j'ai préféré remplacer z-statistic par "standard gaussian" pour faire plus simple

> $$\tilde{\gamma}^{(b)} = \hat{\gamma}^\circ + \sqrt{\hat{S}_{\gamma^\circ}} \cdot Z^{(b)}, \qquad Z^{(b)} \sim \mathcal{N}(0,\, 1)$$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$\tilde{\gamma}^{(b)} = \hat{\gamma}^\circ + Z^{(b)} \cdot \sqrt{\hat{S}_{\gamma^\circ}}, \qquad Z^{(b)} \sim \mathcal{N}(0,\, 1)$$
```

Author: Appliqué

> The quantities $\hat{\gamma}^\circ$ and $\hat{S}_{\gamma^\circ}$ are computed once before the loop, reducing the per-iteration cost to $O(n)$. This approximation is reliable when $N \gtrsim 30$, the typical production setting where $N \gg n$.

Reviewer 2: Le "is reliable when N>= 30 " render de manière bizarre ici, c'est exprès?

Author: Le symbole $\gtrsim$ signifie "supérieur ou égal à une constante multiplicative près" ou moins rigoureusement "au moins de l'ordre de ...". Mais comme il y a une constante absolue à droite, je suis d'accord que l'usage est bizarre. J'ai reformulé pour s'en passer

> The quantities $\hat{\gamma}^\circ$ and $\hat{S}_{\gamma^\circ}$ are computed once before the loop, reducing the per-iteration cost to $O(n)$. This approximation is reliable for large $N$ which is typically the case in production where $N \gg n$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The quantities $\hat{\gamma}^\circ$ and $\hat{S}_{\gamma^\circ}$ are computed once before the loop, reducing the per-iteration cost to $O(n)$ instead of $O(n+N)$. This approximation is reliable for large $N$ which is typically the case in practical scenarios where proxy labels are far less expensive than expensive human annotations.
```

Author: Appliqué, avec une petite modif

### Variance and confidence intervals

The variance of the PTD estimator is the sample variance of the bootstrap estimates:

$$\hat{\sigma}^2_{\text{PTD}} = \widehat{\text{Var}}_B\!\left(\hat{\theta}^{(1)}_{\text{PTD}},\, \ldots,\, \hat{\theta}^{(B)}_{\text{PTD}}\right)$$

> where $\widehat{\text{Var}}_B$ is the sample variance computed across the $B$ bootstrap replicates.

Reviewer: A-t-on vraiment besoin de ce laius sur la variance ici ? On ne s'en sert jamais dans PTD n'est-ce pas ?

Author: Ça permet d'uniformiser avec les autres estimateurs. Je pense que c'est pertinent pour le lecteur malgré que la variance ne soit pas utilisées ici. Et c'est juste deux phrases et une formule ...

The confidence interval at level $1 - \alpha$ is the interval between the $\alpha/2$ and $1 - \alpha/2$ empirical quantiles of $\bigl\{\hat{\theta}^{(1)}_{\text{PTD}},\, \ldots,\, \hat{\theta}^{(B)}_{\text{PTD}}\bigr\}$. This bootstrap percentile approach adapts to the actual shape of the residual distribution, making it reliable even when $n$ is small.

### Power-tuning

The optimal $\lambda$ is estimated from the **bootstrap covariances**. Let $\hat{\mu}_{\text{true}}$ and $\hat{\mu}_{\text{proxy}}$ be the vectors of values $\hat{\mu}^{(b)}_{\text{true}}$ and $\hat{\mu}^{(b)}_{\text{proxy}}$ for $b=1,\dots,B$ respectively. After running the bootstrap loop, it is computed as:

$$\hat{\lambda} = \frac{\widehat{\text{Cov}}_B\!\left(\hat{\mu}_{\text{true}},\; \hat{\mu}_{\text{proxy}}\right)}{\widehat{\text{Var}}_B\!\left(\hat{\mu}_{\text{proxy}}\right) + \hat{S}_{\gamma^\circ}}$$

> where $\widehat{\text{Cov}}_B$ and $\widehat{\text{Var}}_B$ are computed across the $B$ bootstrap replicates of the labeled means, and $\hat{S}_{\gamma^\circ}$ is the estimated sampling variance of the unlabeled proxy mean. The denominator adds $\hat{S}_{\gamma^\circ}$ to account for the extra variability introduced by the Gaussian approximation of the unlabeled mean.

Reviewer: Pas trop d'accord avec la dernière phrase. Le mot "extra" laisse penser que ce terme disparaîtrait si on ne faisait pas l'approximation gaussienne. Or, il serait juste remplacé par la variance des bootstraps proxy unlabeled. Donc je dirais plutôt que ce terme est l'estimation de la variance des bootstraps proxy unlabeled, dont l'estimation est ici cohérente avec notre approximation gaussienne.

Author: Traité

> When the proxy is informative (high bootstrap covariance with ground-truth means), $\hat{\lambda}$ is large and the estimate borrows heavily from the proxy signal, narrowing the interval. When the proxy is uninformative, $\hat{\lambda}$ shrinks toward 0, down-weighting it. Power tuning is enabled by default. Setting `power_tuning=False` fixes $\lambda = 1$, recovering the unweighted PTD estimator.

Reviewer: Ne pas introduire de couplage entre ce guide théorique et l'implémentation concrète de Glide. Idem côté PPI, on peut enlever le "Power tuning is enabled by default". On peut peut-être juste dire que "power-tuning is now a standard".

Author: Traité
